---
layout: default
title: Music
---

# Harmony

**What is Harmony?**

Music contains many elements, with harmony and melody being two examples. Individual notes can occur consecutively or simultaneously. Harmony is when notes are played simultaneously, similar to the blending of multiple colours in a piece of art wheras melody is playing notes consecutively, like the narrative of a story. 

How notes combine creates different types of harmony. Much like the artist blending different colours to produce various works. Harmony is built upon musical intervals. The combination of intervals in unique configurations produces different types of harmony.


**Dualism of harmony and melody**

A common view holds that melody unfolds ‘horizontally’ while harmony rises ‘vertically’. Notes in a melody follow one another consecutively, like points placed on a time line. On the other hand, notes in harmony occur at the same time and looking at a musical score we see that they stack on top of one another vertically.
 
This is a useful way of conceptualising melody and harmony but has limitations I think. It seems as if melody and harmony interweave in a more complex and nuanced way. When listening to monophonic music, harmony is present in the listeners mind even if it is not explicit. Listen to music with not accompaniment such as the beginning of ‘Ave generosa’ composed by Hildegard von Bingen, the harmonic feel of the music is present like a shadow. A shadow often left unnoticed, yet always following.

Likewise, harmony on its own subtly implies a melody line weaving its way through the chordal progression. Pieces with only harmonic progressions are difficult to find but this can be heard in some parts of Hans Zimmer’s Inception soundtrack. 

Melody and harmony compliment one another, mutually arising. The link between these two aspects of music can be seen in the non-musical world. Melody’s shadow takes many natural forms, flowers provide food for bees while the bees fertilise the flowers by transferring pollen between flowers. Bees cannot survive without flowers and nor can flowers survive without bees, they mutually arise similar to melody and harmony.

**Time and memory**

My mind then questions **Why does melody imply harmony and harmony imply melody?**

Looking at how memory interacts with music may answer this question. When we listen to the melody of Ave generosa, the intervals between the successive notes enter our working memory which holds onto them allowing the notes to bleed into one another, overlapping and generating the shadow of harmony.
“Could we experience the residual harmony found in melodies if we were to lose our short term memory?”

Now let’s go in the opposite direction from harmony to melody. Listening only to harmony fills our working memory with a multitude of tones giving rise to the field of possibilities for us to single out a few over the rest. Hearing a dominant seventh chord gives the option of focussing on any one of the notes (eg the fifth) over the others. Does this focus upon individual notes permit us to draw out our own melodies from the harmonic sea?

We have explored the relationship between melody and harmony. How melody and harmony mutually arise together and how each implies the other. But what happens when melody and harmony play together?

**Support**

In Homophonic music, a melody can display a vast array of different colours depending on the harmonic accompaniment. The intervals of the harmony influence the colour of the melody. Take a suspended fourth chord for instance, the root note establishes a solid foundation with both the perfect fourth and the perfect fifth yet the interval between the fourth and fifth is only a tone giving an ambiguous edge to the chord. Ultimately, the fourth ‘wants’ to move down to a third producing the familiar major triad. When a composer decides to use a suspended chord instead of the resonant major triad, it produces a sonic colour which suggests we don’t quite know where we are. 

I think that although a certain essence remains constant in a melody, different harmonies causes the listener to hear the same melody in distinct ways. This contextual element of harmony extends outside of music, the context or perspective which we use to look at the world dramatically changes our perception of it. Try and think about what it is like to be an elephant, how it would be to live in the time of the Babylonian empire or viewing the world through the lens of chemistry seeing everything you interact with as nothing more than a composition of innumerable atoms. The perspectives you use are analogous to harmony of a piece of music, they taint what you experience in a unique light. 

What is the mechanics of these different perspective, why are they different?

**The difference between the notes**

Pythagoras was the one to discover that intervals intricately relate to numerical ratios and relations. Intervals are the atoms of harmony. But unlike atoms, intervals aren’t substantial, they are differences. Differences between frequencies. When a suspended fourth chord plays, it is not the notes that makes it, but the gaps between the notes. The harmony of music is built on what is not more than what is.
Are the perspectives we hold of the world also made of what we don’t see more than what we do?

**Conclusion**

Harmony supplies simultaneous notes to a melody adding structure. Melody and Harmony can be thought to move music in different directions, the former moves horizontally wheras the latter expands the music upwards. Yet both are intricately connected and perhaps reflect deeper connections to interconnected processes in the natural world. Bees and flowers being but one example. Memory possibly allows us to infer the harmonic content of a melody. Harmony adds different colours to a melodic line analogous to the multitude of perspectives we can have of the world. The fact that differences make harmony what it is instead of substance leads us to think about our own perspectives and whether they are really about what we don’t see more than what we do. 


**Jargon**

Intervals - Intervals are the distance between notes There are 12 basic music intervals with names such as minor third or perfect fifth and each musical interval gives a different quality.

Monophonic - Monophonic contains a single melody line with no harmonic accompaniment.

Homophonic - Homophonic music contains a single melody line and a harmonic accompaniment.

Root note - The foundational note of a chord.

Dominant seventh chord - A chord containing a root note, a major third, a perfect fifth and a minor seventh.

Suspended fourth chord - A chord containing a root note, perfect fourth and perfect fifth.




# Metaphysics of Music

**What is Music?**

Music is commonly thought to be sound which follows a pattern. The regular pulse of a drum beat or the reoccurrence of a melodic theme demonstrate an organised structure which we humans identify to be music. 

Here, organisation is the regular, structured and predictable arrangements of an entity’s elements. Cities are organised because they contain roads, buildings and people which follow predictable rules. The people cross the road and reside inside the buildings but roads don’t cross people and buildings doesn’t reside in their citizens. Similarly the human body is organised because it contains organs such as the kidneys, heart and lungs which provide specific and predictable functions. The heart pumps blood around the body not the lungs. Both the human body and a city contains elements which follow regular, structured and predictable patterns and are therefore organised. In fact, almost everything we give a name can be considered as organised in some sense, but let us think about the organisation of music. 

If music can be characterised as organised sound, then **what type of organisation is it? Is organisation something within the perceiver’s mind or intrinsic to the music itself? Does the particular organisation of a piece of music say anything about the listener?**

**Could it be the case that music only appears to be organised to us and in fact there may be no intrinsic organisation to the music?** 
At first glance it seems that organisation may be intrinsic to the music because we can sit down with the written score and spot patterns in the notes, instruments and harmony. This implies that the organisational structures within music are independent from how it sounds. On the other hand, it doesn’t take too long to find two people who disagree on what type of music is _real music_. One genre of music could seem nothing more than a random amalgamation of sounds to one person but a classic to another. This suggests that the organisation of the music may not be inside the music itself but the mind of the listener, this is why the two listeners perceive the same piece of music differently. Moreover, this point of view could also say that the patterns discerned by analysing the score are also subjective and in fact there are no objective account of what is a pattern within music to begin with.
**But if it is all subjective then why do people generally agree on good types of music?**

**Would it be possible to come up with a solution to this problem which does not rely on the Subjective/Objective divide within music?** 

One interesting idea which sidesteps the Objective/Subjective divide I have come across is conceptualising music as having a particular orientation towards eliciting a specific emotion, activity or experience. Under this view of music, a Waltz would be music because it facilitates dancing, “Fast Cars” is music because it creates a sense of sentimental longing in the listener and the noises at the gym coming out of the speakers is music because it motivates one to move their body. Here, music is not understood as a collection of attributes but as having an orientation towards a particular experience, emotion or experience.

This would mean that the appreciation of music is neither subjective nor objective but contextually dependent on the experience, emotion or activity it is tied to. So someone who never dances to electronic music may not consider this genre to be real music, contrarily to someone who does dance to electronic music often.

**But is it only experience, emotion or activity?**

**Why is this type of music related to this experience, is it something intrinsic to the structure of the music, past associations, cultural conditioning, randomness?**

**Does music represent something? If it does, what is the nature of this something?**


**If Music can represent, can is teach us about certain domains of knowledge?**

**If music can represent then can it also negate, and if so, how does it do so?**

**Do musical forms converge and settle on predictable patterns in the same way stories do? What does this say about ourselves?**

**What are the limits of music?**

**Does music provide perspectives for us to look at the world through?**